Hello friends
In this video let us discuss about
BFS
So we have learned about graphs
So how can be traverse graphs that is visit every
node of the graph
We have two major methods for that One is
Breadth-First Search BFS and next is Depth First Search
DFS
S
In this video let us discuss about BFS
in
BFS
We used a queue data structure to traverse the
graph that is to visit all the vertices
Simply let us understand how it is done
Let's start from vertex A. So visit A inserted into
the queue and add it to a visited array
also in this area visited the vertices that our visited
will be added
Now it has A only it means only the Vertex
A is visited now taking vertex A from queue and
visit all its neighbors which are B, C, and D
So these are inserted into the queue and added to
the visited area also now A and its neighbors are
visited
Now take the next element from the queue which is
B visited and visit its neighbors
The neighbors of B are A, D, and E but
A and D are already visited
Only E is not visited
So added to the queue and the visited array now
B and its neighbors our visited. So take the next element
C its neighbors are A and D both our visited
So just move to the next one D and its neighbors
are A B C and E which are also visited
already
So take E its neighbors are B and E again
both are visited Now there are no more elements in
the queue so we can say all nodes of the
graphs are visited now
So this is what
BFS traversal is
We start from a vertex or node visited visit all
its neighbors then visit all its neighbors and so on
So let us see how to implement it
To implement BFS we need to use the
queue data structures
For that, we can use the inbuilt queue functions
by importing java.util.queue it has
inbuilt functions queue operations so let us defined the
size of graph V as five now in main()
Let us define the graph as an adjacency matrix
So we have int arr equal to these values
so the graph is defined
Now let us create an object graph obj
equal to new graph()
Now let us call the function
BFS bypassing this adjacency matrix arr and starting
Vertex
We can start from any Vertex
Here we will start from Vertex 0 So control gets
here and arr is stored in arr and zero is
stored int source
And as we know for BFS we need two data
structures a Queue and isVisited[] array
We will create a queue object queue of individual type
q equal to new LinkedList now declared a Boolean
array isVisited[] of size V that is 5 and
initialize to 0 now the first step is to insert the
starting vertex to queue and make it visited
So write q.add(source); so 0 is inserted
into queue
Now make it visited in isVisited[] array
So isVisited[source] is made true
Now we have to visit all its neighbors so use
a while() loop
for that till the queue is empty so write
while(q.size() != 0) so write
int node = q.poll();
This method poll returns and removes the element at the
front of the queue
so 0 is removed from the queue and stored in node
and print
0 is visited
Now how can you find its neighbors say this is vertex
If there is an edge from 0 to 1
1 is a neighbour
and if there is an edge
from 0 to 2 2 is a neighbour
And if there is an edge from 0 to 3
3 is a neighbor and so on. So how can we check
that we can simply check the adjacency matrix which
all columns are having value one
in zeroth row we have 01 equal to 1, 02 equal
to 1 and 03 equal to 1 so 1 2 and
3 are neighbours of 0
So this the logic so use a for() loop for
int index = 0; index < V;
index++ and in first iteration index equal to zero
Next, we have if arr[node][index] == 1
that is weather index is an neighbour or
not and isVisited[index] == false that
is we are checking if it is already visited
So if the index is a neighbor of node and
if it is not already visited we have to add
it to the queue and make it visited
But here we have array of 00 equal to zero
So if() will fail and in next iteration
index = 1 an array of 01 equal to
one and isVisited[] of one is false that is
one is not visited yet and it is a neighbor
of zero so we need to insert it to the
queue
Now we need to make it visited
So isVisited[] of one equal to true now
now in the next iteration index equal to
2 an arr[0][2] equal to one and
isVisited[] of two is false
that is two
is not visited yet and it is a neighbor of
zero so inserted to the queue and make it visited
So isVisited[] of two equal to true now
Now in the next iteration index equal to three an
arr[0][3] equal to one and isVisited[] of 3 zero
that is
3 is not visited yet and it is a neighbor of
zero so inserted to the queue and make it visited
So isVisited[] of 3
equal to one
Now in the next iteration index is equal to four and
arr[0][4] equal to false and not true
So if() will fail and in next iteration index
equal to five which is not less than V so
the condition will fail and control comes out of the loop
So what have been done here We started from vertex
zero
We visited it and visited all its neighbors to now
in the next iteration of while() loop removed the element
from queue and store it in node
So one is dqueue and storing note
Now print Vortex one is visited
Now we have to visit all its neighbours
So again used the four loop in first iteration index
equal to zero
An array of 10 equal to one that is okay
But ace visitor of zero is true and not falls
That is zero eastern neighbour of one but it is
already visited
So if will fail and the next iteration index equal
to one an area of 11 equal to zero
So if will fail and in next iteration index a
call to to and array of one to equal to
zero
So if will fail and in next iteration index equal
to three
An array of 13 cool to one but ease visitor
of tree is already true
So if will fail here also
So in next iteration index a call to for an
array of one for equal to one and Ace visited
of four equal to falls that is for decent neighbour
of one and it is not visited yet so inserted
to the queue and make it visited
So it's visited a four equal to true
Now in next iteration condition index less than we fails
and candle comes out of the four loop in next
iteration of Wild Loop
Q is not empty so continue dick you next element
to and store it in note print to his visited
and visit all its neighbours
But if will fail in every iteration since Ace visited
is true for every index
So in next iteration Dae Kyun next elementary and print
it is visited and again if will fail
For every iteration of the four Lope here since all
the notes are already visited
So in next iteration of Wild Loop delete the element
from Q which is four and Plant visited Norris for
and again
Same happens now in the next iteration of While Loop
the condition cured outside's not equal to zero will fail
So condole comes out of the wild loop and they
traverse
ALS is completed now
One question to you
Why did we use the east visited array here And
what will happen if we didn't use it C a
traverse a
Means we have to visit each note
If we had kept track of visited notes we would
be said it again and again
And unlike trees graphs may condemn cycles and we will
get into an in finite look
So using this bullion area east visitors can avoid such
issues and each note is visited only one time
So this is what be a faces and in the
next video we will discuss on DFS or depth for
searched